+++
doi = "10.1186/s12987-023-00472-x"
title = "Levels of inflammatory cytokines MCP-1, CCL4, and PD-L1 in CSF differentiate idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus from neurodegenerative diseases"
journal = "Fluids Barriers CNS"
author = "Braun M, Bostr\u00f6m G, Ingelsson M, Kilander L, L\u00f6wenmark M, Nyholm D, Burman J, Niemel\u00e4 V, Freyhult E, Kultima K, Virhammar J."
abstract = "BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammatory processes have been suggested to play a role in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases and post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus, but have rarely been investigated in patients with idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH). The aim of this study was to investigate whether levels of inflammatory proteins in CSF are different in iNPH compared to healthy controls and patients with selected neurodegenerative disorders, and whether any of these markers can aid in the differential diagnosis of iNPH. METHODS: Lumbar CSF was collected from 172 patients from a single center and represented iNPH (nu2009=u200974), Alzheimers disease (AD) (nu2009=u200921), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD (nu2009=u200921), stable MCI (nu2009=u200922), frontotemporal dementia (nu2009=u200913), and healthy controls (HC) (nu2009=u200921). Levels of 92 inflammatory proteins were analyzed using a proximity extension assay. As a first step, differences between iNPH and HC were investigated, and proteins that differed between iNPH and HC were then compared with those from the other groups. The linear regressions were adjusted for age, sex, and plate number. RESULTS: Three proteins showed higher (MCP-1, pu2009=u20090.0013; CCL4, pu2009=u20090.0008; CCL11, pu2009=u20090.0022) and one lower (PD-L1, pu2009=u20090.0051) levels in patients with iNPH compared to HC. MCP-1 was then found to be higher in iNPH than in all other groups. CCL4 was higher in iNPH than in all other groups, except in MCI due to AD. PD-L1 was lower in iNPH compared to all other groups, except in stable MCI. Levels of CCL11 did not differ between iNPH and the differential diagnoses. In a model based on the four proteins mentioned above, the meanxa0area under the receiver operating characteristic curve used to discriminate between iNPH and the other disorders was 0.91. CONCLUSIONS: The inflammatory cytokines MCP-1 and CCL4 are present at higher-and PD-L1 at lower-levels in iNPH than in the other investigated diagnoses. These three selected cytokines may have diagnostic potential in the work-up of patients with iNPH."
month = "10"
volume = ""
year = "2023"
date = "2023-10-14 00:00:00"
pages = ""
+++

