+++
author = "Giannisis A, Al-Grety A, Carlsson H, Howell JC, Hu WT, Kultima K, Nielsen HM."
preprint = false
year = "2023"
month = "7"
pages = ""
title = "Plasma apolipoprotein E levels, isoform composition, and dimer profile in relation to plasma lipids in racially diverse patients with Alzheimers disease and mild cognitive impairment"
volume = ""
journal = "Alzheimers Res Ther"
doi = "10.1186/s13195-023-01262-1"
date = "2023-07-03 00:00:00"
abstract = "BACKGROUND: The APOE\u03b54-promoted risk of Alzheimers disease (AD) is lower in Black/African-Americans (B/AAs), compared to non-Hispanic whites (NHWs). Previous studies reported lower plasma apolipoprotein E (apoE) levels in NHW APOE\u03b54-carriers compared to non-carriers, and low plasma apoE levels were directly associated with an increased risk of AD and all dementia. We further showed that APOE\u03b53/\u03b53 AD patients exhibited reduced plasma apoE dimers compared to corresponding control subjects. Whether plasma apoE levels and apoE dimer formation differ between races/ethnicities and therefore may help explain AD risk racial disparity remains to be elucidated.METHODS: Using mass spectrometry, we determined total plasma apoE and apoE isoform levels in a cohort of B/AAs (nu2009=u200958) and NHWs (nu2009=u200967) including subjects with normal cognition (B/AA: nu2009=u200925, NHW: nu2009=u200928), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (B/AA: nu2009=u200924, NHW: nu2009=u200924), or AD dementia (B/AA: nu2009=u20099, NHW: nu2009=u200915). Additionally, we used non-reducing western blot analysis to assess the distribution of plasma apoE into monomers/disulfide-linked dimers. Plasma total apoE, apoE isoform levels, and %xa0apoE monomers/dimers were assessed for correlations with cognition, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers, sTREM2, neurofilament light protein (NfL), and plasma lipids.RESULTS: Plasma apoE was predominantly monomeric in both racial groups and the monomer/dimer distribution was not affected by disease status, or correlated with CSF AD biomarkers, but associated with plasma lipids. Plasma total apoE levels were not related to disease status and only in the NHW subjects we observed lower plasma apoE levels in the APOE\u03b54/\u03b54-carriers. Total plasma apoE levels were 13% higher in B/AA compared to NHW APOE\u03b54/\u03b54 subjects and associated with plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in NHW subjects but with low-density lipoprotein levels (LDL) in the B/AA subjects. Higher plasma apoE4 levels, exclusively in APOE\u03b53/\u03b54 B/AA subjects, were linked to higher plasma total cholesterol and LDL levels. In the controls, NHWs and B/AAs exhibited opposite associations between plasma apoE and CSF t-tau.CONCLUSIONS: The previously reported lower APOE\u03b54-promoted risk of AD in B/AA subjects may be associated with differences in plasma apoE levels and lipoprotein association. Whether differences in plasma apoE levels between races/ethnicities result from altered APOE\u03b54 expression or turnover, needs further elucidation."
+++

